I. Design Principles

Display space is a scarce resource, and we must maximize its utilization. The
first design principle is thus that there ought never be blank space (save
kerning at the character and interface level) when data is available for
display (when the user requests less detail, that means the detailed data is
unavailable. Collapsed interfaces thus might not fill the screen, though a
screen's worth of data certainly exists). Horizontal space must be used
effectively.

Navigation in two dimensions is difficult; our second design principle is thus
that horizontal movement is modal movement, and not movement within a view. We
might one day support different views of the data by moving horizontally --
list views of layer 2 and layer 3 addresses could be useful. No single view,
however, requires or supports horizontal movement.

II. Organization of interfaces on-screen

There can be more interfaces than there are rows, so even at the lowest level
of detail, we're not assured that all interfaces can possibly be simultaneously
onscreen. Thus, we must deal with hidden or partially-hidden interfaces. The UI
is thus modeled on a rotating reel with interfaces printed on the outside
(think of a slot machine). The alternatives would be an oriented circular list,
aka traditional wraparound at some "beginning" and "end" of the list induced by
a break in symmetry, and absence of wraparound entirely (a simple list). The
rotating reel more naturally matches gesture and mousewheel (continuous)
interfaces, while retaining support for button/keyboard (discrete) interfaces.
Furthermore, certain complexities are avoided (searches can place their results
anywhere on the screen and still fill the screen, there is no "last interface"
which, upon a shrink, would also have to move down to fill the screen, etc).

The rotating wheel does have its disadvantages: when there is less than a
screen's worth of data, there are no effects due arbitrary orientations.
Wraparound would then be more intuitive than rotation, which in this limit acts
more like a permutation. Furthermore, gesture-friendly operations like "get the
second from the top" become impossible. It is rare, however, that so little
data is available; on the other hand, as the number of interfaces increases,
fewer and fewer interfaces can be localized with gestures based on a single
point of orientation. The first issue can be further addressed with smooth
scrolling (in which case the general movement is indicated). The second issue
can be addressed with quality search capabilities.

Searching for interfaces requires specification, which is difficult in the
absence of a keyboard. There thus ought be a navigation widget which compacts
interfaces, and makes use of wraparound rather than rotation. Within this
widget, all interfaces are normalized to a single size, and thus the problems
otherwise associated with wraparound are avoided.

III. Interface display

Interfaces grow and shrink for a number of reasons:

 - new data (possibly expand, possibly beyond screen)
 - removed data (possibly shrink)
 - details level increase (possibly expand, possibly beyond screen)
 - details level decrease (possibly shrink)
 - state change to DOWN (always shrink)
 - state change to UP (always expand, possibly beyond screen)
 - another interface shrinks (possibly expand, possibly move onscreen)
  - ... or is moved offscreen
 - another interface expands (possibly shrink, possibly move offscreen)
    ... or is moved onscreen
 - becoming the active interface (possibly expand, possibly move onscreen)
 - becoming an inactive interface (possibly shrink, possibly move offscreen)
 - screen resize (all cases are possible)

It is not useful for an interface to grow larger than the screen itself, yet
their logical sizes grow arbitrarily. We cap size at the screensize; it is thus
required that we can scroll through more interface details than can be
displayed in the interface, and indicate the presence of undisplayed data.

When an interface is moved, or it grows, it can move on or offscreen. Since
most row-changing operations are of order less than the interface's vertical
size, between zero and two interfaces are, logically, partially visible at any
given time. Rather than draw partial interfaces as expected, however, we always
draw fully boxed interfaces, even if the box is all that is displayed (at the
expense of up to one line of interface details, and violation of the Law of
Least Astonishment). This is due to three facts:

 - an interface logically larger than the screen could then partially spill
    across both screen boundaries, conflating scrolling of intrainterface data
    with that of scrolling interfaces themselves,
 - interfaces themselves *do* have vertical orientation; the interface name,
    arguably necessary for sensible interpretation of any data, is printed on
    the top border. thus it is undesirable to display an interface without
    displaying its top border, as could happen at the top of the screen. this
    is not a worry on the bottom of the screen, but partial interfaces on only
    half the screen would be the least sane option of all, and
 - it is slightly easier to implement.

If any interfaces are displayed, one is the "current interface", the default
target of UI actions. This interface ought always be onscreen. Since it can
grow arbitrarily, starting from some size at some row, we must support pushing
interfaces both up and down, and possibly offscreen. Pushing on an interface
means that interface pushes in the same direction; growing an interface can
thus result in numerous interfaces being pushed. Interfaces other than the
current interface can also grow, though they must not push the current
interface offscreen. While the current interface can grow in either direction,
other interfaces will:

 - grow in the direction opposite the current, unless this would push them
    partially offscreen (it's best if the current interface not move at all).
 - otherwise, push in the direction of the current interface, unless this would
    push the current interface partially offscreen (better to move the current
    interface than to possibly hide the new data).
 - otherwise, partially push themselves offscreen.

IV. Summary

The case of more vertical space than information to display is conceptually
trivial, and we don't generally consider its details below.

Everything pivots on the current interface, which has special properties:

 - It directs changes of other interfaces (preference is given to
    expanding/shrinking so that the current interface does not move)
 - It is given preferential access to all display real estate, and is thus
    always visible.
 - It cannot be split across screen boundaries (this emerges from the model).

The current interface can change due to four events:

 - the user moves up
 - the user moves down
 - the number of interfaces changes from zero to one
 - the current interface is removed from the system

Event-handling matrix: { Event-Effect, Relation-to-Current }

Event-Effect is one of: Shrink (use fewer lines, but do not eliminate the
interface entirely), Remove (purge the interface), Add (create a new interface,
though it might not yet be visible), Expand (try to use more lines), and Select
(the interface becomes the current).

Relation-to-Current is a tetrastate: { Above, Equal, Below, Offscreen }. An
interface split across the screen boundary, unless it is Equal, is defined to
be Above -- this reflects our preference for blank space at the screen's
bottom over blank space at its top (and such an interface clearly cannot be
Offscreen). Add events are almost always Below -- reflecting our preference for
adding at the screen's bottom rather than top -- or Offscreen (it can be Above
when there happened to be an interface crossing the screen boundary below the
current interface). An Add with Equal indicates transition from zero
interfaces to one. A Select event which is Equal is a no-op.

In addition, we define MakeCurrent(), a function called whenever the action
results in a new current interface.

REMOVE: The interface must unconditionally be removed, yielding blank space.
 Above: All interfaces preceding the removed interface up to but not including
        the current are candidates to fill the created space. Move them into
        the space until it is filled, or no more interfaces can be moved. If
        space remains, meaning we must have less than a screen's worth of data,
        move the entire display up to coincide with the screen's first line.
 Below: All interfaces following the removed interface up to but not including
        any data visible across the bottom screen boundary are candidates to
        fill the created space. Move them into the space until it is filled; if
        we reach data visible at the top of the screen, we have less than a
        screen's worth of data, and are properly positioned.
 Equal: If there is no other interface, the current interface becomes null.
        Otherwise, the next interface becomes current. Move it up to fill the
        created space; if it was split, this might create blank space at the
        top; move up all interfaces in such a case until the blank space is
        filled. Run MakeCurrent() on it.
 Offscreen: No action need be taken.

ADD:
 Equal: Can't occur; see above.
 Below: There must have been some empty space on the screen. Draw the interface
        there through the bottom of the screen. If it cannot be wholly
        displayed, we must have a full screen, so there's no reason to split it
        over the interface boundary.
 Above: This is the rare case of an interface below the current one being split
        across the screen boundary. Logically, we would replace the bottommost
        portion of the split interface -- the portion at the top of the screen
        -- with the equivalent bottommost portion of the new interface,
        possibly retaining some suffix of the previous split interface. This
        can be confusing -- there's be no indicator, given less space than
        optimal for the new interface, that the data observed suddenly belongs
        to a new interface. This could be mitigated by making new interfaces
        visually distinct, temporarily, from existing ones.
 Offscreen: No action need be taken.

EXPAND:
 Equal: If we have not reached the bottom screen boundary, expand down.
        Otherwise, if we have not reached the top screen boundary, expand up.
        Push everything between us and the screen boundary in the direction of
        the expansion, possibly offscreen (splitting an interface in this
        manner is not possible -- if we push something off the bottom, we had a
        full screen; if we push something off the top, we couldn't push down,
        and thus also had a full screen, since we prefer space at the bottom).
 Above: If we have not yet reached the top screen boundary, expand up, pushing
        everything between us and the screen boundary up.
 Below: If we have not yet reached the bottom screen boundary, expand down,
        pushing everything between us and the screen boundary down.
 Offscreen: No action need be taken.

SHRINK:
 Equal: Always shrink towards the topmost portion of the interface.
